Change Log
==========

Version 4.0.0-beta.2 *(2017-03-28)*
-----------------------------------
Version 4.0 of SquiDB will bring several feature enhancements. Development is taking place on the dev_4.0 branch. This second beta adds several feature enhancements (outlined below) to the first beta. Note that 4.0 is not yet fully stable; there may be bugs as well as future API and/or behavior changes. This second beta includes the following changes:

* The public API of SquiDB has been annotated with the jsr305 `@Nonnull` and `@Nullable` nullability annotations. This includes parameters and return values of all public API methods, as well as getters in setters in generated code. If you find something in the API that is either missing a nullability specifier or that you feel has an incorrect nullability specifier, please let us know!
* Several new annotations for specifying SQL constraints on tables or columns in model spec classes have been added to `squidb-annotations`. These new annotations are preferable to the old method of specifying constraints as raw SQL, because they can be subject to additional validation at compile time. Relevant changes:
    * The `@ColumnSpec` annotation has been removed in favor of the annotations described below. Users of `@ColumnSpec` will need to update their model specs before they can compile with 4.0 beta 2.
    * Some annotations have been moved to new packages. Most notably, the `@PrimaryKey` annotation has been moved to the `com.yahoo.squidb.annotations.tables.constraints`, and the upsert annotations introduced in 4.0 beta 1 have been moved to `com.yahoo.squidb.annotations.tables`. Users of these annotations will need to update their model spec imports before they can compile with 4.0 beta 2.
    * New annotation types:
        * Table-level constraints. These annotations annotate a table model spec class and add their constraints to the table definition. Examples include `@UniqueColumns` and `@PrimaryKeyColumns` for specifying a collection of columns to be used in a SQL `UNIQUE` or `PRIMARY KEY` table constraint.
        * Column-level constraints. These annotations annotate a table model spec field and add constraints to the corresponding column definition. Examples include `@NotNull(onConflict = ?)` for specifying a SQL `NOT NULL` constraint, or `@Unique(onConflict = ?)` for specifying a SQL `UNIQUE` column constraint (both with optional conflict resolution clauses).
        * Default value annotations. These annotations annotate a table model spec field to type-safely specify a default value in the column definition. A dedicated annotation exists for each basic type so that the annotations can be validated that the default value type corresponds to the column type. Examples include things like `@DefaultString`, `@DefaultLong`, and `@DefaultBoolean`.
        * A dedicated `@ColumnName` annotation has replaced the functionality of `@ColumnSpec(name = ?)`
    * The constraint annotations can be found in the `com.yahoo.squidb.annotations.tables.constraints` package. The default value annotations can be found in the `com.yahoo.squidb.annotations.tables.defaults` package.
* The `PROPERTIES` field in every generated model class is now an immutable `List<Property<?>>` instead of an array. Where applicable, methods have been added to the SquiDB API to make sure that variants for either `List<? extends Property<?>>` or `Property<?>...` are available.
* `squidb-ios` now targets j2objc 1.3.1. Minor source changes may be required if building with an older version of j2objc.
* Parameter and return value annotations on `@ModelMethod`s are now copied to the generated class, with special handling for `@ObjectiveCName`.
* Fix an issue where `SqlTable.qualifyField` type inference would behave badly for functions. This method has been replaced with `qualifyField`, which always returns a `Field<?>`, and `qualifyProperty`, which accepts only `Property` objects and does some type inference on the argument to return the same property type.
* Add `getCreateTableSql` method to `Table` and `getCreateViewSql` to `View` for returning the `CREATE TABLE` and `CREATE VIEW` SQL statements for those objects, respectively.

Version 4.0.0-beta.1 *(2017-01-31)*
-----------------------------------
Version 4.0 of SquiDB will bring several feature enhancements. This first beta lays the foundation for future changes in the 4.0 development stream, which is taking place on the dev_4.0 branch. Note that 4.0 is not yet fully stable; there may be bugs as well as future API and/or behavior changes. This first beta includes the following changes:

**User facing changes**
* All deprecated methods from SquiDB 3.x have been removed
* `SquidDatabase.onDowngrade()` now returns false by default. Users will need to override the `onDowngrade()` hook and explicitly return true if they wish to handle downgrade cases.
* The default `ID` property is now no longer generated by the code generator. The 3.x code generator has been logging a warning about this impending change for a while; existing users should have/must now update their model specs to explicitly declare this rowid alias as a field like so: `@ColumnSpec(name="_id") @PrimaryKey long id;`. Going forward, new tables will not have an automatically generated rowid alias/integer primary key column unless one is explicitly declared. In the absence of an explicit declaration of an integer primary key, a reference to the built-in SQLite rowid column is declared instead.
* A new `upsert()` method has been added to SquidDatabase, supported by a new `@UpsertKey` annotation. This feature allows users to declare one or more columns as a "logical key" in a model spec in order to "upsert" (aka "update or insert") that model. When upserting, an update is performed if a row matching the model's logical key value already exists in the table; otherwise, an insert is performed. This is distinct from `INSERT OR REPLACE` in that it does *not* delete the existing row before inserting the new one (which avoids triggering any foreign key's `ON DELETE CASCADE`), is better able to handle column default values in the insert case, and can optimize out the write operation of an update if no data has changed. See the `SquidDatabase.upsert()` javadoc for more details.

**Code generator changes**
* The SquiDB code generator has been completely rewritten to use Square's JavaPoet library.
* Major changes to the plugin API:
    * Now uses the JavaPoet classes to hook into code generation instead of the old apt-utils classes. The new plugin behavior and APIs are documented in the `Plugin` javadoc.
    * The `Plugin` class itself is now an interface. Instead of extending `Plugin`, users can either implement `Plugin` in its entirety, or subclass `AbstractPlugin` to inherit stubbed implementations of all the plugin methods, overriding only the relevant ones.
    * Plugins must now provide a 0-arg constructor to be instantiated. Plugins are then initialized with a ModelSpec instance via the `init()` method. Plugins that do not want to handle a particular model spec can simply return false from this `init()` method and they will be discarded.
* An `iOSModels` option has been added to the code generator as a parallel to the `androidModels` option. The `iOSModels` option causes getters and setters in the generated model class to be annotated with `@ObjectiveCName` for more iOS-friendly accessor names.

Version 3.2.3 *(2016-12-13)*
----------------------------
* Fix a bug in model `clone()` which would cause the cloned instance to be sharing a transitory values map with the original model object
* Fix some bugs in the `squidb-json` addon that could cause JSON property getters to return incorrect values under certain conditions
* Fix transitory values to be able to handle null values and keys correctly

Version 3.2.2 *(2016-12-05)*
----------------------------
* Introduce a new error logging mechanism in the code generator that allows SquiDB to log errors without generating a bunch of "cannot find symbol \[ModelClass\]" errors
* Implement validation in the code generator to guard against illegal column or table names, e.g. those that use SQLite keywords or contain invalid characters.

Version 3.2.1 *(2016-11-07)*
----------------------------
* Fix a bug that could cause `containsNonNullValue(Property<?>)` to return an incorrect result under certain conditions.
* Eliminate several harmless warnings that could be emitted by the code generator when compiling using Java 1.8.
* Deprecate the SQLite version constants in the `VersionCode` class in favor of use-case specific constants in other classes. Most notably, `VersionCode.LATEST` is superseded by `SQLiteBindingsAdapter.SQLITE_VERSION` for the `squidb-sqlite-bindings` project, and `VersionCode.V3_7_11` is superseded by `Insert.SQLITE_VERSION_MULTI_ROW_INSERT`.
* Minor enhancements to null argument handling in the `in()/notIn()` criterion creating methods.

Version 3.2.0 *(2016-11-01)*
----------------------------
* Add an experimental, under-the-hood change that can lead to performance increases of up to 70% for transactions inserting a large number of rows, and ~25-50% in the average case when inserting rows. The change is disabled by default; to enable it, users can call `setPreparedInsertCacheEnabled(true)` in the `onConfigure` method of their SquidDatabase. See the javadocs of `setPreparedInsertCacheEnabled` for more information.
* Add a new `prepareStatement` API to SquidDatabase, which allows users to prepare and reuse low-level (non-query) SQLite statements. Reusing these prepared statements can result in a performance improvement when used judiciously.
* Introduce the [`ArgumentResolver`](https://github.com/yahoo/squidb/blob/master/squidb/src/com/yahoo/squidb/sql/ArgumentResolver.java) API that lets users control how non-primitive values are bound to SQL statements (e.g., a user could override enum value handling to bind the values using `ordinal()` instead of `name()`). Custom `ArgumentResolver` implementations can be used in a SquidDatabase using the extensible `buildCompileContext` method.
* Move the `copyDatabase()` debugging utility into SquidDatabase. Fix some bugs with its implementation to make it behave nicely with databases in WAL mode and be thread safe.
* Some minor enhancements to the BasicPropertyGenerator plugin API that make it easier to modify the declarations of a model's getters and setters.
* Bump the SQLite version in `squidb-sqlite-bindings` to 3.15.0.

Version 3.1.3 *(2016-09-02)*
----------------------------
* Fix a bug where enums that override toString() would be incorrectly serialized to the database. It's likely that you would have noticed a problem before now if this happened to you, but if you've been persisting an enum column with an enum that overrides toString(), you may have to run a data migration to fix the issue. Sorry to anyone affected by this!

Version 3.1.2 *(2016-08-24)*
----------------------------
* Fix a bug introduced in version 3.1.1 where automatically generating the deprecated default ID property would cause a compilation error. This issue only affected users who have not yet updated their model specs as described in the 3.1.0 release notes.

Version 3.1.1 *(2016-08-23)*
----------------------------
* **Edit:** A bug with the deprecated default `INTEGER PRIMARY KEY` column existed in this version. Users should use 3.1.2 instead.
* Further enhancements to the `INTEGER PRIMARY KEY` changes introduced in version 3.1.0. Any columns acting as an alias to the model rowid will now generate named getters and setters, which will delegate to `getRowId()/setRowId()` under the hood. This makes rowid alias columns easier to work with.
* Enhance code generation plugins by allowing them to declare compile-time options that they consume using the `@SupportedOptions` annotation. This makes it easier for the code generator to warn about unused/mistyped options passed to SquiDB as well as allowing user-defined plugins to consume their own custom option flags.

Version 3.1.0 *(2016-07-27)*
----------------------------
* Removed restrictions on the `@PrimaryKey` annotation so that columns of any type may be declared as the primary key for the table. SquiDB will stop generating the `ID` property as a rowid alias in a future version; as such the `getId()` and `setId()` methods in all `TableModel` subclasses are deprecated in favor of the more descriptively named `getRowId()` and `setRowId()`. See [this wiki page](https://github.com/yahoo/squidb/wiki/Primary-keys) for information on how to future-proof your existing model specs for this change.
* SquidCursor now exposes the "hint" class object of its type argument via the `getModelHintClass()` method

Version 3.0.0 *(2016-06-23)*
----------------------------
* Version 3.0 adds cross-platform support by supporting compiling SquiDB with [Google's j2objc tool](http://j2objc.org/). The new `squidb-android` and `squidb-ios` modules provide low-level platform-specific SQLite access, while users interact only with the higher-level SquidDatabase and SQL builder APIs. Write your database code and other business logic in Java, and compile it to run on both Android and iOS devices. See [this wiki page](https://github.com/yahoo/squidb/wiki/Changes-in-SquiDB-3.0) for instructions on how to update to the new version.
* Introduce the new `squidb-json` addon, which facilitates serializing arbitrary objects to String columns as JSON and working with the new [SQLite json1 extension](http://sqlite.org/json1.html). See [this wiki page](https://github.com/yahoo/squidb/wiki/JSON-support-in-SquiDB) for documentation about what you can do with this addon.

Version 2.1.0 *(2016-06-14)*
----------------------------
* The `ViewModel#mapToModel` API would break down if the ViewModel consisted of multiple joins on the same table with different aliases.
  This release adds a new version of the `ViewModel#mapToModel` API that takes a second table alias argument to specify which table alias
  should be used when mapping result columns back to their source table rows.
* Generated models now contain a Javadoc link back to their model specs for easier navigation in the IDE
* Fix several harmless warnings that could be emitted by the code generator
* Bump the SQLite version in the `squidb-sqlite-bindings` project to 3.13.0
* SquiDB 3.0 will be arriving soon, adding support for iOS via [Google's j2objc tool](http://j2objc.org/). Development is in progress on [this branch](https://github.com/yahoo/squidb/tree/dev_3.0).

Version 2.0.3 *(2016-04-15)*
----------------------------
* Add the ability to use enum types in column definitions. Enums properties serialize their values to strings for storage
* Significantly improved some internal locking code so that it is safe to call `close()`/`clear()`/`recreate()` on a SquidDatabase from any thread. These methods will now block if any transactions are ongoing to ensure that the database cannot be closed from one thread while another is writing to it
* Add an experimental hook `onDatabaseOpenFailed()` that allows users to attempt to recover if the database could not be opened for a reason other than a failed migration. This hook is considered beta and experimental, so it may change in the future
* Fix a bug in the code generator that would generate column definitions from `private static final` fields in model specs
* Fix a bug where data changed notifiers could be triggered during database open if database writes occurred during any of the open or upgrade hooks
* Bump the SQLite version in the `squidb-sqlite-bindings` project to 3.12.1
* Deprecated a few methods in SquidDatabase that will be removed in SquiDB 3.0

Version 2.0.2 *(2015-12-10)*
----------------------------
* Adjustment to code generation so that constants are written after schema declaration. This allows constants to be defined in terms of Property objects in the generated model (e.g. `public static final Order DEFAULT_ORDER = Model.TIMESTAMP.asc()`). Also introduces the `@Constants` annotation, which allows annotating a static inner class of constants in a model spec for when class loading order is important (as it is in ViewModels).
* Add some utilities for logging the contents of a cursor in a formatted way (see `SquidUtilities.dumpCursor`)
* Bump the SQLite version in the `squidb-sqlite-bindings` project to 3.9.2
* Fix a bug where properties returned from `qualifyField` had an explicit alias set when they should not
* Fix a bug where tables aliased using `Table.as` did not have an associated rowid property

Version 2.0.1 *(2015-10-29)*
----------------------------
* SquidDatabase will now call onConfigure before onOpen for Android API level < 16
* Function.substr can now get its start and length arguments from arbitrary expressions, not just integers
* Support using ThreadLocals as arguments in SQL statements. This can make reusing a precompiled query or other SQL grammar object easier in a multi-threaded environment
* Add versions of Criterion.or and Criterion.and that work on List&lt;Criterion&gt;
* Bump the SQLite version in the `squidb-sqlite-bindings` project to 3.9.1
* Fixed an issue where SquidDatabase called insertOrThrow when wrapping SQLiteDatabase.insert
* Fix a bug in the code generator that could cause a necessary abstract method to be omitted

Version 2.0.0 *(2015-09-23)*
----------------------------
* Unified DatabaseDao and AbstractDatabase into a single SquidDatabase API
* Basic RxJava support via the `squidb-reactive` module
* Improved data changed notification mechanism
* Support connecting to custom SQLite builds instead of stock Android SQLite
* Enhanced code generation plugin API
* Add SquidRecyclerAdapter for working with RecyclerView (available in the `squidb-recyclerview` module)
* Other misc fixes and enhancements
* See [this wiki page](https://github.com/yahoo/squidb/wiki/Changes-in-SquiDB-2.0) for instructions on how to update from SquiDB 1.x to 2.0

Version 1.1.0 *(2015-07-29)*
----------------------------
 * Add the ability for generated models to implement interfaces using the @Implements annotation
 * Add the ability to pass information about failed database migrations to your AbstractDatabase hooks using MigrationFailedException.

 **Potentially incompatible change**: The protected onMigrationFailed method now takes as a single argument an instance of MigrationFailedException. If your AbstractDatabase subclass overrides this method, you will need to update it.
 * Fix a bug where creating indexes could fail on API < 16
 * Fix a bug where SQL that needed validating (e.g. from ContentProviderQueryBuilder) could get a false positive on API < 16
 * Fix bugs related to attaching databases when write-ahead logging is enabled
 * The Insert builder will no longer fail silently if you try to insert multiple sets of values on API < 16.
   It will instead throw an exception since the corresponding SQL is only valid on SQLite version 3.7.11 or higher,
   which was added in API 16.

Version 1.0.1 *(2015-06-18)*
----------------------------
 * Add a @PrimaryKey annotation. This enables two things that weren't possible before:
   * Declaring id columns not named "\_id"
   * Disabling the `AUTOINCREMENT` behavior with a flag in the @PrimaryKey annotation

Version 1.0.0 *(2015-05-29)*
----------------------------
 * Initial stable release of SquiDB
